Dear Thay, dear friends!

I am very happy to have the opportunity to share a little bit of a great adventure I took part in last fall, when a mini fourfold Sangha traveled to five countries in Latin America for a tour with public talks, days of mindfulness and retreats. This had been a dream, a seed in the heart of 3 Spanish-speaking Brothers in our community for 10 years already! The seed took its time to sprout, until finally many wonderful conditions came together and the lovely flower opened. 7 monks and nuns and 3 lay practitioners formed a group; we didn't know each other so much yet, but I strongly believe that the land of Latin America knew very well who should come! She knew that we would become a real river in the course of 6 weeks journeying and practicing together, teaching the Plum Village Dharma doors and rediscovering them through the hearts of thousands of new friends. Maybe you have met my monastic Brothers and Sisters (Thầy Pháp Liệu, Pháp Lưu, Pháp Khải, Pháp Thệ and Sư Cô Bội Nghiêm, Hài Nghiêm and Sứ Nghiêm) already, and so I just really want to introduce the three lay angels who accompanied us: there was Wouter Verhoeven, a film-maker from Holland who has the best talent of mindful filming. He was always working hard, from very early morning until very late evening to take images of our teachings directly in Spanish, and also of people practicing in all 5 countries. He can film the stillness and intimity of sitting meditation and no one will ever feel disturbed, in fact we usually don't know that he is standing somewhere with the camera... With his countless hours of footage from the tour, he is now preparing a documentary which will make Plum Village practice available to tens, maybe hundreds more thousands of people around the world who only understand Spanish.

(photo Wouter camera)

Besides we were blessed with the presence of Aurora Conde and Joaquin Carral, a young Mexican couple who have been in the Wake Up Sangha in New York for many years, and who also started the Latino Sangha of New York. They are both extremely kind, funny, committed to the practice and they love the monks and nuns! Because they are medical doctors and have the great aspiration to promote the health benefits of veganism to the Latino community, and because (like my Brothers and Sisters did) they love all the exquisite plant foods available in South America, we would often invite them to introduce eating meditation and the 5th Mindfulness Training on mindful consumption. On top of that they were tirelessly translating from English to Spanish and the other way around, and guiding sessions of deep relaxation. 

(photo Aurora and Joaquin)

Now let me tell you some short stories which happened along this tour in Chile, Ecuador, Colombia, Nicaragua and Mexico. But before anything, if you have a map of the Earth somewhere near you, why don't you take a look to see where are these five countries?
In Santiago, the capital of Chile, we offered tangerine meditation at least 3 times, and each time it was guided by a different monk or nun. The most funny one went like this: Brother Pháp Khải made us recognize the shape, color and texture of the tangerine, looking deeply into the conditions that had brought it about - the tree, the rain, the sun, the farmer..., seeing the hidden potential of the tangerine - ‘You know, this tangerine can turn into a song...because when I eat it, I’m happy, and when I’m happy I might want to compose a song!’; slowly peeling - ‘Let us try not to damage the flesh!’; smelling, smiling and salivating, placing a section on one’s tongue - ‘Don’t bite into it yet!!’; masticating carefully, aware of the movements of the tongue and jaws before swallowing. 

(photo tangerine)

On our first day in Ecuador, we were invited to have lunch at Tinku, a lovely permaculture centre in the city of Quito. Marcos welcomed us and introduced the garden, the eco-construction workshops and the design of the centre which takes into account all elements like wind, rain, sunshine, shade, soil, plants, animals and humans. Chari and Elisa served us a delicious, vegan Ecuadorian meal including memorable empanadas filled with spinach, raisins and garlic. We felt so moved and grateful because of the openness and the trust immediately manifested to us: Marcos had only met us for the first time an hour before and he said that if we wanted, a Sangha in Quito could hold their practice sessions here at Tinku. (This paragraph won't be in the Vietnamese newsletter)

That same evening we had an event at the Simon Bolivar University, and I’ll always remember the cellular phone mirror exercise taught by Sr Bội Nghiêm:  holding your mobile in front of you while it’s still turned off, you smile at your reflection, then make an angry face and smile again. How do you feel? You can say to yourself “I love you” before making a call to another person. How can we change the world if we don’t have compassion for ourself? If we want to liberate our mind, to love and be loved, we need a spiritual dimension in all activities of our daily life, especially in the most casual ones like talking on the telephone. As we were going to share about eating meditation we found out that in Ecuador, most people are still very fortunate to gather as a family for every meal. That is a big lesson the Ecuadorians taught me! Later, we took questions from the participants. One of them was a representative of the Ministry of Well-being (Ministerio del Buen-Vivir, yes, the government of Ecuador has such a department) who called our attention on the issue of increasing violence in teenage boys. Remembering insights that Thay had shared in the past, the Brothers and Sisters suggested that we should respond to these young people with understanding of the difficult circumstances that have brought them to such behaviors, and that we do all we can to give them love and attention rather than punishment. Also we strongly encouraged the adults to teach mindfulness and compassion to children from the youngest age, and to build safe, loving environments where the seed of violence is no longer watered.

One week later, we were already in Colombia, and this country is maybe the one that has had the saddest reputation in South America, because of how much space violence has taken in the news worldwide. However our visit there was so beautiful, friendly, and inspiring when we saw hundreds of people engaged in a spiritual life... in particular young people and families with small children. At the 3-day long retreat 3000 meters up in the mountains, with hummingbirds flying at the windows all the time, there was a questions and answers' “marathon” for our Brothers and Sisters. It was so lively and deep at the same time. Among the questions that received most concise and direct answers: “How to let go of the past?  -Breathe.” and “How to deal with negative people? –Be positive.” But most importantly, we remember the spirit of togetherness, openness and humanity pervading the meditation hall that morning. After the last walking meditation, Brother Camilo (a Sangha friend and actor who participates in a UN project of promoting reconciliation) delighted us with his “Mindfoolness” clown show, a hilarious, silent skit about the craziness of our lifestyles and the training of a meditation practitioner.

(photo clown)

The fourth country, Nicaragua, is the one that marked me the most probably because of its poverty, its really tough history for many centuries which still affects every single Nicaraguan person's daily life, and at the same time the overwhelming beauty of the land and the people. Brother Pháp Liệu said of all five countries we came to, it is the one that resembles Vietnam the most. Also because of which foods grow there! I was so glad because the weekend retreat in Managua was attended mostly by social workers and activists, young people who protect women against domestic violence, help street children from very vulnerable backgrounds and situations of risk, living in the streets, victims of sexual abuse, exposed to drugs, and also some of the teenagers who came out of these sufferings, women who’ve set up an agricultural cooperative... many bodhisattvas who from now on will continue to breathe and walk in mindfulness to help themselves and their homeland. The last day we came together for the symbolic planting of a guava tree, which will grow along with 500 fruit trees that our delegation offered to the women’s cooperative in Rio Blanco as a token of compassion for future generations, and a very significant action to offset the carbon emissions due to our flights across the continents.  
(photo planting)

And so here we arrived in Mexico, already at the final stage of the adventure! The context in which we landed was unexpected and painful: the whole country was touched by a rather strong emotion after 43 young people had disappeared. It was like the last drop of water making the cup overflow because tens of thousands of people disappeared and were killed in the past years, presumably they were taken by the drug traffickers. Because of this current situation, in a press conference we introduced the methods used to take care of strong emotions like anger, fear, despair, thanks to mindful breathing and compassionate listening. Brother Pháp Lưu emphasized the importance of building loving communities to prevent and stop the spread of violence, and he took the very inspiring example of Maria Gamboa's film ''Mateo'' which came out in Colombia this year and was nominated for the Oscars.

During the final public retreat I felt I was standing among my own blood family at every moment. The night of the 31st, we celebrated “Dia de los Muertos,” the worldwide reknowned Mexican festival of the Dead. On the traditional altar were placed photographs and memories of tens of relatives brought by the retreatants. We began by a silent recollection, and then everyone followed the invocation of the blood ancestors, spiritual teachers and ancestors of the land who gave all their love and efforts so we can be healthy and happy now. Brother Pháp Liệu helped us to listen to our ancestors and to request their support and assistance in difficult situations. Nowadays, young people are rarely given the opportunity to connect with themselves, with their emotions, not to mention with their ancestors… that is why making an offering of incense on the family altar and following each in-breath and out-breath is a way to bind body and mind and unite past, present and future generations with love and strength.
(photo ancestors' altar)
We stood a long time around the sacred fire. Each person burnt a piece of paper on which they had written their deepest vow to transform negative habits and to offer more peace for the world. This gesture was symbolic of the trust in the Sangha and the universe to help us realize our most meaningful wish. 

Something else that touches me about the final days in Mexico when I look back at the pictures just now, and I had not noticed so much then, is the great beauty of melting Western monasticism with Vietnamese Zen monasticism: of course it is already something very special to have a mini international community wearing the same robes, whose blood ancestors came from Vietnam, France, the USA, Lebanon, Germany, Eastern Europe, Madagascar... But also, the location of the retreat was the Benedictine monastery of Nuestra Senora de los Angeles. It's a place filled with the energy of God thanks to the diligent practice, the constant prayers, the generous service and the open-mindedness of the fourteen Benedictine monks who live there and accepted to host a Buddhist retreat for 150 people. 
In fact like in many previous tours abroad where our Plum Village monastic community was welcomed by Christian monks or nuns, I’ve always felt extremely grateful to be able to marry the two traditions in my own practice. Sometimes, like for instance in a souvenir shop in  Columbia, we were asked whether we were Franciscans; and I think there is really some truth there! Anyways it is all the more encouraging for peace in the world, to my opinion, to get the feeling while looking at these pictures that Zen Buddhism can be completely naturally at home in Latin America (which has been known as one of the most Christian continents for the last few centuries).
(Picture with the Benedictine monks)

A third great stream of spirituality nourished each of my steps and breaths on this journey, and it is of course the wisdom of the native peoples of Latin America. I was always, always struck by the strength of values like respect of the Earth, of the people and other species as parts of the Oneness of life, openness to receive new understanding everyday, generosity and gratitude... most of the times without a word exchanged, I felt the true meaning of brotherhood and sisterhood that Thay always wants us to cultivate.

This tour was a gift of happiness for me; it has allowed me to grow in my practice of compassion and I would like to deeply thank Thay, the Sangha, and all the people I met along the way who showed me how to be a better instrument of the Dharma. On the last day, before taking the plane back to France, our film-maker, Wouter, asked each of us to say one word in Spanish expressing what mindfulness means in our heart and my answer was: Esperanza. Hope!